Thank you very much. It's a pleasure to
be here. Nick, can you start off by just
telling everyone a little bit about who
you are and what your background is?
>> Yeah, thank you. Um, I'm a professor of
biology at Boston College in Chestnut
Hill, Massachusetts.
I currently teach cancer uh metabolism.
Cancer is a metabolic disease. I teach
general biology to the non- majors
um going over fundamental aspects of
evolutionary biology and and
biochemistry as well. And uh we focus uh
um um on um maintaining or improving um
scientific literacy which seems to be uh
very in in very short supply.
uh and me among members of our of our
society. So uh we we try to improve uh
understanding of becoming more
scientifically literate and being able
to interpret uh information. So I I
teach those classes and we've been I've
been here at BC for almost 49 years uh
40 years actually and um pretty much
running my own research program for all
these years uh on a variety of different
uh backgrounds epilepsy bio lipid
biochemistry
uh cancer metabolism and now
predominantly cancer uh metabolism. Mhm.
[snorts] And let's just start out with
with some basics around cancer. Can you
just give us a a good definition for
what cancer is? What characterizes
cancer cells as opposed to other cells?
And what I'm interested in here besides
the definition too is do you have a
definition that differs at all from what
we might call the orthodox definition
you might find in a textbook?
>> No, I I think the definition in the
textbooks are what everybody would agree
upon. And that definition is cell
division out of control or disregulated
cell growth. The the controversies and
the discussions are on what is the
origin of that and and how you manage
that. So um uh but the definition is
pretty well um accepted throughout the
scientific uh communities. Cell division
out of control uh disregulated cell
growth is what is generally referred to
as cancer. Mhm. So, so cell cycle has
been disrupted somehow. The cells are
growing in a disregulated fashion.
There's no disagreement on that. That's
that is what cancer is. Um, it's pretty
intuitive, too. I think the average
person gets that, you know, well enough.
But there's definitely different ideas
out there around what's causing that
dysregulation to begin with.
>> Yeah, that's right. That's that's where
the uh main discussions
and controversies are today as to what
is the origin of the disregulated cell
growth. How does that how does that
happen? What what would induce a
population of cells in a particular
organ uh to begin a proliferation that
is no longer regulated. Um you know we
we do in our normal cells uh normal
tissues we have cells that will divide
uh and grow and replace other cells that
have been worn out and degraded from age
and wear and tear. Um probably the
biggest or one of the most interesting
aspects of normal cell division uh is
regenerating liver. uh a a lobe of the
liver can be taken off uh either an
animal or a human and you can get uh
massive rapid regrowth
um and replace the a large number of
cells that were removed in the lobe and
that that's rapid cell division under
control. It's not disregulated control.
They the cells know when to stop. uh
they don't continue to grow as opposed
to a hepatoma which is a cancer of one
of the cells in the liver uh that has
disregulated growth. Um those cells do
not they no longer respond to the
inhibitory signals that the cells in a
regenerating liver uh would uh would
have. So we have cell divisions that
occur naturally in different organs. the
gut, the crypt cells of the gut, uh all
of these all of these normal cells are
are dividing. They have cell division,
but in contrast to cancer, uh th those
cell divisions are under control and
where cancer cells are out of control.
>> So out of control or disregulated
doesn't merely mean that the cells are
growing quickly because as you said, we
we've got cells that divide quickly um
in different parts of the body. That
happens, but it's happening in a
regulated fashion. They know when to
grow. They know how fast to grow. And
even if they're growing quickly, it's
done uh as it's supposed to be done.
It's done in a regulated fashion. And
it's only when somehow someway the cell
cycle controls on that division get
disrupted that things become cancerous.
>> Yes, that's right.
>> And so when I like I remember very
clearly being a biology student all the
way back in high school, college, and so
forth. I never studied cancer in the
lab. So my exposure was just in the
textbooks in the classroom. But I
remember very clearly being told um that
you know we sort of knew how cancer
arose and that that is well you know we
we we've got the genome. The genome
contains the full suite of genes. Um
every cell's got a a genome
[clears throat] inside of it the nuclear
DNA and there are tumor suppressor genes
and there are anko genes. So these are
genes that encode things that somehow
someway are tied into the regulation of
cell cycle. And when you acquire
multiple mutations in certain genes,
anka genes promoting cancer, tumor
suppressor genes suppressing cancer, um
if you get some combination of mutations
in these types of genes, then you will
get cancer. And that is how we get
cancer. That was that was what I
learned. And to what extent is that true
for certain cancers? To what extent was
that just sort of a one model that I
learned about as if it was the model?
[clears throat]
>> Yeah. Well, I learned the same model
and I read the same textbooks.
>> If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/toforcancer,
the new community by our research
analyst Johnny Rocker. Within this new
community platform, you can connect with
other patients and learn from their
experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr. Dr.
Thomas Ciphford. We will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy, as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols. So, take a look around
at school.com/keto
for cancer.
uh and I believed uh well I I I had no
reason to challenge it uh that what you
just described as the model um the tumor
suppressor genes the ankco genes and and
all these kinds of things because I had
taught genetics uh I have a degree in
genetics from the University of Illinois
and uh we were all led to believe that I
you know I I didn't uh I I I was a
mamalian geneticist and we looked at at
mandelian inheritance of different
things. Um and then we learned that you
know cancer cells have a lot of
mutations and uh they seem to be um out
of control driven by what you just said
you know tumor suppressor gene defects
and anka gene turn on and all this stuff
and we had to became deeper and deeper
into the kinds of signaling cascades and
the phosphorilation defosphorilations
and all these kinds of things that we
get more and more in depth on this. Uh
it wasn't until I I started uh uh look
when we doing work on epilepsy uh we we
um mapped genes for epilepsy many many
different genes and we studied this for
many decades at Yale University when I
was there and here at Boston College and
um [clears throat] we were always
finding new genes but we never were able
to manage the the epileptic seizures
with the information that those gene
mutations were telling us. And then we
learned about this ketogenic diet that
seemed to work to manage epileptic
seizures uh regardless uh of whe of the
origin whe whether it [clears throat]
was a genetic based uh seizure whether
it was um acquired based seizure viral
in infect infection seizure. There's a
lot of ways you can get epileptic
seizures but it seemed as though this
ketogenic diet was able to manage uh a
broad range of of seizure disorders. Um
and then we said well what's the common
mechanism by which this diet could
manage these different seizures of
different origins and it was never never
clear to us. So can I just so it's one
way of sort of saying all of that that
you know if you go back in time and then
you and then you come back forward in
time you know we've got the molecular
revolution we have the human genome
project we start to figure out like okay
here's the genome sequence here's the
gene for this the gene for that we we
there was this thinking that there was
going to be a gene for everything and so
as an example in the epilepsy field
you're saying people started to uncover
genes that were associated in some
fashion with epilepsy and as we
accumulated that knowledge
It didn't actually tell us how to solve
epilepsy. So, we had all these genes
that were related to epilepsy, but it
wasn't really telling us what to do
treatment-wise. But then you had this
diet, the ketogenic diet, which was
effective for treating many forms of
epilepsy. And it did not depend actually
on which mutations you had or didn't
have. Yeah. And it was kind of
surprising. And then we were doing um
angioenic research on on on brain tumors
here. Uh we had found that there were
certain glyolippids that were
provocative to angioenesis. And at the
turn of the century around 1999 2000 uh
the the the work in cancer was was the
angioenesis um surge the abnormal
vascularization of tumors and Judah
Vulman had come out with from Harvard uh
saying that you if you have an antibbody
you could shut down against vascular
endothelial growth factor and you know
um uh Jim Watson of the Watson and Crick
DNA fame uh said, "Oh, Judah Vulman has
found the cure to cancer uh by targeting
blood vessels and shrinking shrinking
the tumors down to nothing." So, we we
were studying angioenesis
uh from the perspective of of
glycobiology
and we were very excited about fi
finding certain glyolippids that
actually had an impact negatively on
angioenesis.
Um but then we we were also doing
calorie restriction for epilepsy and
then we found out that calorie the the
work from Payton Rouse many over about a
hundred years ago showed that calorie
restriction could shut down angioenesis.
So so we're saying whoa what's going on
with the calorie restriction and then we
found out that the calorie restriction
could also um uh um manage manage
epileptic seizures. The ke ketogenic
diets given in restricted amounts
managed epileptic seizures by lowering
blood sugar and elevating ketones.
[snorts] And um calorie restriction did
the same thing. And then and then of
course we started seeing calorie
restriction really uh shrink angioenesis
in cancer cells and it was linked to the
low the level of blood sugar in the in
the in the bloodstream. So we had
published a paper showing there was a
direct relationship between how high
your blood sugar was in these were in
mice. We did linear regression analysis,
how fast the tumors would grow and how
how the blood vessels would be reduced
in in conjunction uh with w with w with
with lowering blood sugar.
>> So I said, "Wow, this is really
interesting. Anybody ever seen anything
like this before?" Of course. Of course.
Otto Worberg had seen it a long time
ago.
>> Okay, perfect. because I was going to
ask you about some of the history here
because it I I'm again I'm not a cancer
guy so I don't know all of the details
here on the history but as I started to
read your stuff and and other stuff in
this realm it wasn't that you know one
thought I had is okay well we must we
thought that the sematic mutation theory
was the way things worked that you
accumulated these mutations in tumor
suppression anka genes and that does
appear to be the way it works at least
for some cancers to some extent but then
you know over time our knowledge has
grown but then I I started reading some
of your reviews and I realized, oh no,
actually for a long time there's been
these different competing ideas on
ankcoenesis and how cancer arises. It's
there's a deeper history here than I
realized. So who's this Warberg
character and what are his ideas?
>> Yeah. Well, that's I didn't know who he
was. You know, in in science, we all
hear of the Warberg apparatus and Otto
Warberg. Uh his name had always been
kicked around in the background of of
whatever we did. He had a major impact
on biochemistry, one of the leading
biochemists of the 20th century and he
was involved in a lot of different kinds
of things. The the photosynthe
photosynthesis
um he he uh he had produced many not
only did he have a Nobel Prize but he
Hans Krebs worked with him uh he he
worked uh with a lot of of of leaders in
the field of biochemistry. Um so I
started to think bigger about like well
who the hell is this Warberg? what what
what did he say and how did he say it
and then why was his ideas shelved? Uh
why why did the field move away uh from
him onto what we called the genetic idea
of what cancer is with tumor suppressor
genes and anko genes and all this kind
of stuff. So I I started to go back and
my research on ma mice with brain tumors
and metastatic cancer, controlling it by
lowering glucose and elevating ketones
showed me a power that uh rarely was
seen in a lot of the uh genetic ideas
about about cancer. uh with respect to
um improved quality of progression free
and overall survival uh was really quite
improved significantly and and then I
said well what was it that Orberg said
that was inconsistent with what the
worldview was
Warberg was an interesting character he
came from a history of scientists
physicists and this kind and he was
trained in the rigid u um quantitative
German German Germanic way of doing
science. And uh he he claimed that one
mole of oxygen consumed equals 7 moles
of ATP produced and that one mole of
lactic acid uh produced equal one mole
of ATP. And he was able to uh devise a
Meerhoff quotient unto determination of
oxygen consumption related to ATP
production. And um immediately he ran
into um a buzzsaw uh with his own work
as well as that of of of Sydney
Weinhouse who at that time was the
director of the National Cancer
Institute after the Second World War.
And Winehouse came right out and said
Warberg's hypothesis is not correct. uh
even though many cancer cells consume
less oxygen than normal cells, Warberg
attributed that to a a disturbance in
oxidative phosphorilation leading to a
compensatory uh f uh fermentation. So,
so in other words, as cancer cells lost
their ability to generate energy through
uh uh oxidative phosphorilation, they
were forced to um compensate the lost
energy that uh with um the fermentation
mechanism, which is energy without
>> without the idea there for those that
are not well verssed in this. So, our
cells can make energy using our
mitochondria and something called
oxidative phosphorilation, which
requires oxygen and that's a really good
way to make a lot of ATP, a lot of
energy. There are other ways to make
energy and they're less efficient. The
idea here that I think it sounds like
you're articulating for for what Warberg
was talking about was okay if oxygen if
oxidative phosphorilation is compromised
the sh the cell will shift to using
something like glycolysis a less
efficient way of making energy because
something has disrupted this other way
it has to make energy.
>> Yes. And glycolysis would be super
upregulated in cancer cells relative to
normal cells. and and he felt that that
up that uh massive upregulation of
glycolysis
uh which is what they call lactic acid
fermentation
uh was the signature of what the origin
of that was the disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation
>> and and he said if you disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation too acutely cells will
die because they will not have an
opportunity to compensate. So a chronic
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation
led to a protracted increase in uh in
fermentation, lactic acid fermentation.
>> And then he was trying to quantify those
phenomenon by showing that cancer cells
took in less oxygen but they produced a
far greater amount of lactic acid
showing the balance that the o overall
energy balance was compensated for by a
non oxidative energy metabolism. and and
um that that was that was his his his
big thing that uh what what what Sydney
Winehouse uh jumped all over him on was
that uh which leads today which many
folks in the field today are still
behind Sydney Winehouse which we have
eviscerated completely uh but also
because of Warberg made some mistakes
but but um uh the the bottom line the
bottom line here is that Warberg had
found a couple of tumors that actually
were consuming oxygen at the same rate
as normal cells and Winehouse pointed
those out and said, "How can you
possibly have an insufficiency of
oxidative phosphorilation
uh when when uh when you have oxygen
consumption equal to that the normal
cells and tumor cells?"
>> Yeah. and and Warberg said, "Well, um uh
the the fermentation was unable to put
out the the the oxfas uh [clears throat]
um the the oxels
was unable to squelch the fermentation."
[laughter] So,
>> so others Yeah, let let me let me others
then jumped on the idea that oh no, this
is a this is a problem uh with
fermentation. It's an abnormal
fermentation has nothing to do with an
insufficient oxidative phosphorilation.
And the field jumped on this because
ankco genes and all this became the
drivers of the fermentation. Uh and and
and going back to the oxygen consumption
argument of Warberg, it was wrong.
>> So, so as an episode in history, uh that
this is perhaps a good lesson because
you know biology is messy. Uh our
knowledge is incomplete. Warberg had
ideas, other people had ideas. There
were exceptions that seem to contradict
some people's ideas and people were
debating, you know, why are we observing
this if this is true and so on and so
forth. And so the score was never really
settled there. People disagreed, but it
sounds like what ended up happening is
um the field sort of uh uh agreed that
one one set of ideas was true even
though things weren't truly resolved.
Yeah. And and I think the biochemists
were beating each other up uh o over
these observations
uh and everybody coming out with a
slightly different uh interpretation. Um
was Warberg right? Was Warberg wrong? Uh
what does this support him? did this not
support him? And that was all during the
1930s and 40s and 50s and then of course
with the uh Watson and Crick Nobel Prize
for the structure of DNA. And of course
many others were part of part of this
DNA revolution. And um you know back at
the early part uh of of the century in
in 1914
um
uh Theodore Bovery uh claimed that
cancer might be due to some sort of
chromosomeal aberration and maybe it has
maybe it's it's the chromosomes that
that might be uh because every time you
look at a at a tumor cell there was
always abnormal chromosomes uh in there
and it was that was just more or less um
a kind of an off and and and Bovery
himself clear in that first he said you
know it was all speculative he said I
have no know he never studied cancer in
his life he said I'm probably I'm
embarrassing the field I'm I'm
interloper I don't know what I'm talking
about he said the cancer could be just
as due to something in the cytoplasm but
I have no idea I'm just speculating on
this anyway when Watson and Cricks came
out um oh wow this genomic stuff may
have been already known way back in 1914
by Theod Bovery oh my god So we anointed
him as the father of the gene theory of
cancer, Theodore Bovery. Um and in the
meantime, biologists
have always been um inferior in some
ways uh to physics. Uh physics is the
pure intellectual idea of human brain.
Uh the highest level of of quantitative
assessment comes from physics. So many
biologists have always had physics envy.
And when Watson and Crick came out with
the quantitative analysis of of of
nucleic acid patterns to link to amino
acid structures, we now bring biology
into a molecular range far more
quantitative and less messy. Uh as you
said,
>> it's a harder science. Now hardest
absolutely even the physicists were
jumping in into the biology area now
because they felt that they could use
some of their skills and knowledge to
further understand the molecular biology
of of the cell and and why it was just
like a a stampede of people. Everybody
you had to do something molecular
biology was no longer systems approach.
it was now a molecular kind of a
>> and one thing one thing I I think I want
to emphasize here and and I'll you know
get your input if you think this is true
you know science science is this thing
that people have invented [snorts] and
we have this sort of ideal of science
what it looks like if you're fully
rational and dispassionate and you're
making totally objective observations
but we have to remember also that it's a
human enterprise and humans are social
creatures and we all have careers and
aspirations and motivations that have to
do with the social realm. And once the
molecular revolution happened in the
mid- 20th century through to the human
genome project and really until very
recently in my opinion, [snorts]
one of the ways that you could make a
real career for yourself as a scientist
in the molecular biology realm was
identifying a gene for something,
identifying an anka gene or a tumor
suppressor gene. And so there was this
really really sort of simplistic gene
ccentric mindset developed because you
could really make a whole career on
cloning and isolating and identifying
genes involved with cancer or some other
disease. And it got us into this sort of
very simplistic geneentric mindset. I
think is that how how you see it or or
how you see
>> it? I think it started that way for
sure. Uh in in in a less complicated way
which was thought only to uh explode
into a into a hopelessly complicated
situation which we have today.
>> Um but before we got there we thought uh
that we could uh identify
specific mutations that could be
responsible for the disregulated cell
growth. Um a and then it became it
became as it as the s as the field
evolved and Warberg was left behind and
getting back to your uh human nature
behavior. Sydney Winehouse had some
animosity towards uh Otto Warberg uh
because of Hitler sparing him during the
Second World War. Um and and and uh he
should have been gassed uh with the with
during the Holocaust. Why why was Hitler
sparing him? And the stories that Sam
Apple brought out in his book Ravenous,
uh what Hitler feared cancer, like there
was no tomorrow. His mother died of
breast cancer or something.
>> And um he knew Warberg was the the guy
in the world uh that would have a better
understanding of of cancer than anyone.
And if there was going to be a solution
to this cancer problem, it would have
been Warberg. Um so he survived Second
World War working. He had no he was no
fan of Hitler, believe me. He threw the
brown skirts out of his lab. I mean he
was quite uh but he just wanted to
continue with his with his research and
then after the war uh White House and
other uh Jewish folks were concerned
that why why did he survive when the
rest of us had to suffer.
>> I see. So they they had an
interpretation that maybe there was some
nefarious reason for that even though
apparently there wasn't. And remind me
Wine House was at the National
Institutes of Health at a pretty high
position. So, so that was a politically
powerful position that probably enabled
White House to have their ideas spread
further and faster than they otherwise
would have been.
>> Yeah. And the other thing too is Dean
Burke was um uh a strong supporter of of
Warberg and Dean Burke was also before
Winehouse the head of the National
Cancer Institute and he was thrown under
the bus with Warberg. of them [laughter]
were discounted uh for various reasons
and and and um because the field was so
much more excited in the gene uh and and
getting into the molecular basis for
this and felt that the guys in the
biochemistry were not um were not really
doing anything. And in 1976, uh,
Winehouse wrote this book, wrote this
paper about Warberg's flicker of
metabolism flickers only dimly now as
the field has moved away from this
ambiguity. And he eviscerated uh,
Warberg. And he even said to himself, he
hate to u say unfavorable things to a
guy who died. Warberg died in 1970. and
White House wrote this paper in 1976 and
pretty much, you know, just just ripped
apart everything that that Warberg had
said and why he was wrong and all this
all this kind of stuff.
>> So, so we've got the science actually
happening. People are in the lab,
they're making observations, they're
coming up with hypotheses, but there's
also these political and social, career,
human aspects to what's going on. So,
people have, you know, political
motivations or career motivations to go
with or against other people. They want
certain ideas to spread, others not to
spread. And so, you know, that's all
mixed together with legitimate
observational and and scientific uh
disagreements that were happening.
Absolutely. That's the way science
works. Uh you you have an idea and and
if you can get enough support for your
idea, you can you can turn the direction
of the field. A and uh as the genes more
and more genes became recognized in
cancer cells uh you know I think there
were Nobel prize prizes for anko genes
and tumor suppressor genes and these
kinds of things and and then it became
it gradually became more and more clear
as the as the technology for genetic
analysis improved uh over the years that
cancer cells had thousands and different
kinds of of mutations. um how is it
possible that that any one of these
mutations could be linked to
disregulated cell growth? So then we had
to parse uh the types of mutations that
were uh present in these cells and we
called them pass at least um
Dr. Vogelstein from John's Hopkins
started to parse them out into passenger
genes and and and driver genes. So the
driver genes became more uh recognized
as those that were more likely to be
involved in disregulated cell growth
than some of these other passenger
genes. And then it became clear and
clear that, you know, we couldn't find
specific drivers that might be
responsible for disregulated cell
growth. Like the p-53
uh tumor suppressor gene uh was thought
to be the key driver of cancer, but not
all cancers had mutations in p-53 and it
was not always so clear uh about what
about what was going on. So then then he
introduced the dark matter. May maybe
maybe these really bad the real drivers
uh are in this called genomic dark
matter that that was nowhere to be found
or nobody knew what what it was. But it
was a it was saying yeah yeah the dark m
the dark matter. So so uh um what does
that mean? you know, it became it
started to become more bizarre uh as it
was not possible to uh to specifically
identify uh a particular gene or even a
group of genes that could count account
for the disregulated growth. Yeah, this
is a let me let me just say when we
started to take apart cancers and we
started to separate them into individual
cells uh within a tumor and then clone
up those cells and then do genomic
screens on the individual cells to get a
better picture. Every cell in the tumor,
not one cell had the same genetic
problems as any other cell within the
same tumor.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And so this is this is
another common pattern in in science, I
think, where you know, someone has an
idea, they have a hypothesis. Naturally,
you want your hypothesis to be right.
You want your theory to be correct. So
you're trying to gain support for it.
But very often, you start to accumulate
these observations that just don't fit
with it, things you can't quite explain.
And [snorts]
what often happens is that the
hypothesis just becomes more and more
elaborate and you start adding all these
auxiliary hypotheses to your theory and
you come up with these new concepts.
This is like what you meant by by the
dark matter concept and stuff like that.
You have to make your theory more
elaborate to accommodate the
observations that actually aren't quite
fitting with the original idea. And
before the theory actually dies or goes
away, sometimes years or decades can go
by where it becomes this sort of complex
and elaborate monstrosity compared to
what it was originally. And it's because
you're starting to accumulate ideas over
time that don't actually quite fit with
that idea. Yeah. Well, that's exactly
right. And and that and that uh shows
the um almost exactly what you said was
the situation uh for the um geocentric
theory uh of the solar system. um for
1,800 years from the from from from the
time of of Aristotle to Tami uh it was
thought that the earth uh was the center
of of of the solar system and the uh
mathematics to explain the movement of
the planets became more and more complex
with epicycles deference and equants and
it turned into a giant massive ball of
thread um challenging all of the minds
at that time to come up with more and
better and more sophisticated
mathematical formulas to explain the
movements of the planets. Even
Capernacus himself was struggling with
these same uh mathematics until he put
the the sun in the center of the solar
system using the same mathematics. Now,
now you could predict, you became
predictable as to where the planets
would be a and uh the the sun um was the
center of the solar system with the
earth just simply being another planet
moving around along with the other
planets and everything called the
capernician revolution and and
everything made sense uh from a a
massive amount of complexity and and
right now in the in the in the gene
theory, we we're stuck in this in this
uh quagmire of of more and more
complexity.
uh like like you like you've just like
you've just mentioned um ignoring
ignoring uh facts uh that have emerged
also in this complexity that are very
inconsistent with the with the somatic
mutation theory for example sir Michael
Stratton out of England sir Michael
Stratton for his massive work he's done
on genomic uh revolutions genomic
analysis he published a paper in breast
cancer showing a significant number of
breast tumors that had no mutations. um
in compar using the same technology
where he found other breast tumors
loaded with mutations uh he found some
uh about 30% of breast tumors that had
that had no mutations and I I I said wow
this is interesting what does he say
about it and the answer was nothing it
was not even me the data were presented
but there was no discussion about
>> just kind of didn't talk about it
>> no didn't talk about it and and then
there was a paper by Parsons and a big
group I can't I don't can't remember
where they were may maybe John's hop
Hopkins. I think they were at Johns
Hopkins as well. Um where they did a big
screen uh uh on glyopblasto
and um they looked at about 25 or 30
cases and they found mutations in all of
the major uh mutations in these in the
PI3 AKT signaling the the um um three ba
major signaling pathways except one
except one uh sample. It had no
mutations in any of the any of the major
pathways. The B B20 some in their figure
three of the paper and the the the BR20
sample had no mutations.
>> And I said, "Wow, how do how do you
explain that?" And of course, not a
single word was mentioned about the
single sample that had no mutations in
any of the three pathways.
>> Um we're now seeing uh more more
cancers. there's some
appendimoblastoomas in children where
they have no mutations yet they all have
they yet they all have disregulated cell
growth. So that was kind of like well a
headscratcher because those findings are
not consistent with the sematic mutation
theory and now with the deeper
sequencings over the last few years
we're seeing driver gene mutations p-53
as well as others with significant
mutations in the structure of the p-53
and other uh u driver mutations in
normal tissues in normal cells and
tissues all throughout our body with no
disregulated cell growth associated with
the mutations in the driver genes. Okay.
So, you're saying over time we've
accumulated these weird examples where
in some cases you have cancer cells, but
they don't have mutations in the ankco
genes or the tumor suppressor genes and
in other cases you've got normal cells
that are not cancer cells and they do
have those mutations and so these things
have just sort of accumulated to some
extent at least and they largely went
sort of unexplained. People just sort of
said, well, it's just one cell line in
that paper and they really didn't talk
about it. Well, and and the most some of
the more recent papers have come out
even discussing the cancer cells that
have uh normal cells that have driver
mutations and and uh they don't really
like to discuss the fact that there's
some cancer cells that don't have
mutations because they say, "Well, you
can't support anything by the absence of
evidence." Um uh maybe our techniques
weren't as sophisticated. There's always
some excuse, but it's harder to explain
the driver mutations with mutations in
normal tissues. Yeah.
>> So what they say is we maybe we now have
to parse the concept of driver mutations
and and say that the search is not yet
complete for the really some super
category of driver mutations that we
seem to be missing. Even though we've
got even though we've cataloged over 100
million different kinds of mutations, we
still have not found the ones that
leading to the disregulated cell growth.
So it's more so the search is not
complete.
>> Yeah. So so the two ways to view this
conundrum are okay, the search is not
complete. the mutations must be there
and we just haven't found them yet. Or
the alternative would be well you're
you're looking at you're looking up the
wrong tree here.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's hard that as
you mentioned at the very beginning,
Nick, very hard to say you might not
have been correct in the theory that you
built your career around.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, so
>> but let me let me say one more thing.
The devast the most devastating evidence
against the somatic mutation theory has
has come from the nuclear mitochondrial
transfer experiments where the nucleus
of a tumor cell is now placed in a
cancer um uh in a normal cytoplasm.
>> So you would expect that the normal cell
to turn into a cancer cell because it's
going to now have all of those mutations
that are supposedly there.
>> Yeah. So and and and you don't get that
that and the Israel Schaefer experiments
along with uh invivo Rudy Enish's group
down here at MIT. Um we had Jim Morgan's
group at at St. Jude's. Uh we had
Beatric Mintz at at Thomas Jefferson.
All of these classical developmental
biologists
uh were finding evidence that was
inconsistent uh with the sematic
mutation theory. So, um, you pile that
on top of the some cancers without
mutations, normal cells with driver
mutations and and and a nucer nucleus uh
uh being with with supposedly the the
the the drivers and the uh tumor
suppressors uh placed into a normal
cytoplasm with normal mitochondria is
the the neoplastic phenotype is
completely suppressed. And on the other
hand, if you take the normal nucleus and
put it into a tumor cytoplasm, you end
up with cells that are disregulated in
their growth.
>> Wow. The the these these observations
clearly state that the origin of
disregulated growth resides in the
cytoplasm, not in the nucleus.
>> Wow. Okay. So, so literally, people can
do experiments where you've got cancer
cells, you've got non-cancer cells. You
can suck the nucleus with all of the
nuclear DNA out of a cancer cell and put
it into a normal cell. And if it's the
case that the cancer is caused by
mutations in that nuclear DNA, you
should then cause the non-cancer cell to
become a cancer cell because you're
putting in all those mutations, but you
don't see that. And then you're saying
vice versa. You can take the nucleus of
a normal cancer cell or non-cancer cell,
so it's got none of these supposed
mutations in it. Put it into a cancer
cell and it's still a cancer cell. And
you're saying that indicates that
whatever's causing the cancer to be
cancer is in the cytoplasm rather than
the nucleus.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And and and and those
discussions of the nuclear transfer
experiments um very interesting uh how
they respond to them. uh uh one uh
person uh a leader in the field uh one
of the most uh recognized leaders in the
field was confronted with the data uh
with those uh mito mitochondrial nuclear
transfer experiments and said if that if
those experiments are true the whole
cancer field needs to be turned upside
down and be recognized as incorrect.
Therefore, those experiments cannot be
true.
That preserves the dogma of what's going
on. In other words, you they're so
profound in their in their
interpretation that it can't be true.
Yet, the leaders in the field of
developmental biology were the ones who
who did this. And the beautiful thing
about that, they were unbiased. They
were not asking whether cancer were a
genetic disease or a mitochondrial
metabolic disease. They were simply
asking the question can the nucleus of a
tumor cell direct normal development and
the answer is yes up to a degree and
then the system would abort. But uh they
never thought I was the one who took all
that and I reinterpreted the data in
light of the sematic mutation theory uh
that this is completely inconsistent
with the sematic mutation theory of
cancer. Uh they those guys were not
asking that question. They wanted to
know how far in development a cancer how
how how how far could a a cancer nucleus
drive normal developmental processes.
And then it turns out that there's yes
there are mutations in the nucleus of
the tumor cell. But it seemed to be
those the products of those genes were
absolutely essential for moving the
organism from one developmental epoch to
the next. And when that gene was not
there the system imploded and aborted
and and that's what they s that's what
they found.
>> Okay. So, so in essence, you've got two
competing schools of thought. The
sematic mutation theory, which is
basically that you get DNA mutations and
that drives cancer. You've just laid out
some of the history there. Some of the
problems that kept popping up with that
hypothesis. You've also got this other
school of thought, what some people have
called what you've written the
mitochondrial metabolic theory. And this
is more akin to Warberg's ideas that
that look at it as a more of a metabolic
and mitochondrial issue. So if I go back
to what you said about Warberg's ideas,
tell me if this is a fair
characterization of sort of what the
essence of his hypothesis was. If you
[snorts] shut off a cell's ability to
use oxidative phosphorilation, it's
mitochondria to generate energy, if you
do that quickly, the cell's going to die
because it's just not going to have
enough energy to to live. However, if
you do that slowly, if you sort of in a
prolonged fashion choke off the
mitochondria's ability to use oxidative
phosphorilation, the cell will adapt to
that in some sense by using glycolysis
and other forms of energy production
more than its mitochondria
and that [clears throat]
is then going to lead to the formation
of cancer. Is that a fair summary of
what that idea was?
>> Yes. uh and then we just now we just
have to get into it a little bit more
detailed and and show the actual uh
processes by which that that can happen
[clears throat] and what happened with
Warberg. So he was rigid in in saying
that one mole of oxygen uh consumed was
seven moles of ATP and the field uh was
locked into that idea that oxygen
consumption is a good marker for
production of ATP. Um we just published
a paper very recently doing it uh using
a novel experimental design showing that
brain tumor cells uh both mouse and
human oxygen consumption is not an
accurate marker for ATP production
through oxidative phosphorilation. So
people
were making an assumption that there
would be a really tight correspondence
between the oxygen consumption of a cell
and how much it was using oxidative
phosphorilation which sounds like a very
natural assumption because oxidative
phosphorilation depends on oxygen. But
what you're saying is that assumption is
actually not that good and for a cancer
cell it's very accurate for a normal
cell but not accurate for a cancer cell.
And Warberg was basing his uh actually
it was Hans Krebs who developed the the
technique for assuming that or for
showing clearly showing that oxygen
consumption was linked to ATP
production. Uh uh and he did he he did
those experiments and Warberg simply use
assumed also like everybody else does
that this is true that oxygen
consumption is a surrogate marker for
ATP production and in normal cells it
is. Uh but in cancer cells it's not.
they're uncoupled. Uh they they use
oxygen to produce reactive oxygen
species uh with much much less ATP
coming from the oxygen consumed than
would be happening in a normal cell.
Okay.
>> So we were the first not not only us
there was a few other experiments done
in the scientific literature showing
that cancer cells use oxygen for some
for activities other than ATP
production.
>> Yeah.
>> So so this was the big mistake and and
now today listen to this. We're using
the seahorse oxygen consumption uh
machine uh instrument sold by the
millions and millions of dollars all
over the world for measuring uh ATP uh
for measuring o using uh formulas to
assume how much ATP is being produced
for oxygen consumption. Never never
using the direct chemical measurements
like we did. Yeah.
>> So, so, so the idea is we use
bioluminescence showing the degree of
ATP. Uh, seahorse instrument that most
people use now to say that oxygen
consumption is normal in in cancer
cells. Yes, the cancer cells are taking
in oxygen, but they use a formula to
estimate ATP. They're actually measuring
ATP.
>> We're the only ones the first group to
actually measure simultaneously oxygen
consumption with ATP production. And
there's a disconnect in cancer cells.
It's so so I mean I I wish more people
outside of science understood how common
this is. But when you are using it's
very common in science for something
like this to happen where you're using
calculation
to stand in for direct observation and
because you're doing math and because it
seems fancy and rigorous you lose sight
of the fact that you're not actually
observing things directly you're making
assumptions that are masquerading as
observation.
>> Yeah. that and that was one thing and
the other thing that Warberg did not
know about uh and nor do many people
today know about that the cancer cell
generates energy through two different
types of fermentation one is the in the
cytoolic
u in the in the payoff phase of the
glycolysis pathway in the mdhoff ars
pathway uh where you get uh uh ATP there
and that's everybody knows that's up
upregulated in cancer cells but the
problem is there's different types of
pyuvate kynise. So you produce a lot of
lactic acid, but it's not an accurate
marker for how much ATP is coming
because the pyuvate kynise M2 isoform
allows lactic acid to be produced, but
it's not linked to ATP production
through that step. So measuring lactic
acid is not an accurate marker for
determining how much ATP you're getting
through through fermentation. That's
number one. Number two, all many people
in the cancer field know cancers are
glutamine addicted. Glutamine addicted.
>> What is glutamine?
Glutamine is an amino acid, most
abundant amino acid in our body. It's in
the bloodstream. It's it's a it's a very
valuable amino acid to run our immune
system, our our uh ura cycle. It's
needed for for nucleic acid synthesis. I
it's it's a very for our gut, the health
of our gut. Uh we use glutamine.
Glutamine is the most abundant amino
acid in the body. A and it's there for
very specific reasons uh that that we we
know about. Um, at any event, the field
knew that cancer cells were addicted to
glutamine. So, you put cancer cells in
in oxygen and you see they taken in
glutamine. Oh, glutamine is being
respired. It's called an anoplurotic. I
hope I'm not getting too deep in the
science here for you.
>> No, no, no. Keep keep going. Keep going.
>> Because it's an anoplurosis. Anoplurosis
means the replenishment of the TCA cycle
with carbons. So when you look at uh
oxygen cons so you see oxygen
consumption and the and the uh gl the
the glutamine is pouring into these
cancer cells and they they thought the
glutamine was being respired. We now
have direct evidence that the glutamine
is fermented in the mitochondria by by
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. So the mis why the mi
the misinterpretation of the data
because oh my my my cancer cells are
taking in oxygen and they're blowing out
uh ATP and we're seeing the ATP. The
problem is what's the origin of the ATP?
It's coming through a glutamol
fermentation glutaminolysis pathway
dumping out suinic acid as a waste
product. So su suxenate does not stay in
the TCA cycle. It's getting blown out as
a as a waste product. This is all new
stuff. This is brand new stuff.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So basically one way to
summarize some of that is our cells have
multiple ways of creating ATP, the
currency of energy in our cells. There's
oxidative [clears throat]
phosphorilation in the mitochondria.
There's fermentation of the cytool.
There's lots of different details that
can go into exactly how oxygen and other
things like amino acids get sucked in
and then converted into energy. And
[snorts] many people have made mistakes
or assumptions about, you know, if I
measure this one output, it means this
is being used or that's being used. And
a lot of those assumptions have been
mistaken uh in the past. And so there's
been a lot of confusion generated about
what means what in terms of inputs and
outputs with respect to energy
production in the cells.
>> Yeah. Absolutely. And and and and if you
go in the textbooks, you know, it says
predominantly uh u cytoolic ATP
production uh fermentation and and
oxidative phosphorilation. But there's
there's what we now broken it down by
into traditional biochemistry. We have
two forms of ATP production. One is
through oxidative phosphorilation.
uh uh in the mitochondrial inner
membrane through a chemo chemiosmotic
hypothesis of Peter Mitchell. Uh and
then we have substrate level
phosphorilation and substrate level
phosphorilation is the movement of a
phosphate group to an organic molecule
to produce ATP. So so you can produce
ATP with a non oxidative process and
there's two of those. One is in the
cytoplasm and one is in the mitochondria
itself at the suanil coa ligase
reaction. uh alpha ketogluterate to
suininal COA to suxenate and you get
everybody said oh it's GTP in cancer
it's ATP and and they make a buttload of
it in in in the tumor metabolism and
they're dumping out suxinic acid. Let me
let me give you uh people in the heart
field uh the cardiovascular field knew
knew about this but never never turned
it over to the cancer field. For
example, when individuals have heart
attacks, uh what you see right after the
heart attack is a buildup of lactic acid
and suinic acid in the bloodstream. And
those are the fermentation fuels that
are compensating for the acute loss of
oxidative phosphorilation. And your bo
your neurons need to have a a proton
mode of gradient. They need a an
electrical process across the membrane
otherwise they're going to die. they
they cannot compensate for loss of oxfos
chronically to upregulate uh substrate
level phosphorilation. So what happens
is that you build up this massive amount
of of succinic acid and lactic acid and
as soon as the blood oxygen come back in
suinic acid and lactic acid both
disappear because because they were
needed there for a short period of time
to m to maintain the electrical chemical
gradients otherwise you're going to be
dead. So cancer cells are dumping out
lactic acid and suxinic acid even in the
presence of oxygen. Very different than
what happens during heart attacks and
interruptions of acute interruption of
oxidative phosphorilation. And this is
what Warberg said. Warberg said cancer
cells continue to ferment in oxygen. But
he didn't know that fer that glutamine
was the second major fermentable fuel.
And that caused a lot of confusion. So
so uh we've cleared all that up now. It
becomes very clear. We've cleared up the
ambiguities associated with all these
mis mis uh assumptions and now we we
have hard data to support uh how these
cancer cells are in fact living in the
absence of oxygen using a fermentation
or in minimal levels of oxygen. So, so
uh a couple things I want people to get
here. So, under normal conditions,
non-cancer conditions, [snorts]
>> you know, I'm breathing in air. I'm that
oxygen's going to my blood. It's getting
to all my cells and they're using that
as an electron acceptor in the electron
transport chain of the mitochondria.
This is part of the oxidative
phospholation way that we make a lot of
our energy. If I start working out
really really hard, I can't keep up with
how, you know, how far I'm pushing my
muscles. And [snorts] so things shift
from, you know, I s sort of running out
of oxygen in a sense. And so things
shift towards uh glycolysis and these
other forms of energy production. And
that's what builds up things like lactic
acid. And that's why say you start to
get tired and your muscles burn when
you're working out hard. Is that
accurate?
>> Yes. And you also build up some suinic
acid as well.
>> And but so what you're saying is okay,
that's how things work under normal
conditions. We would assume that um if
lactic acid is building up and things
like this, it must mean um the cell's
not able to use oxygen. But what you're
saying is tied to Warberg's ideas is
what actually seems to happen in some
cancer cells is they kick out some of
these things that you would expect to
see in the absence of oxygen even in the
presence of oxygen. Absolutely.
Absolutely. And people and the big thing
now is they're kicking out both um
listen to this. They're kicking out
lactic acid and suinic acid. Uh suxinic
acid leaves the TCA. It always should
stay in the TCA cycle if you're
respiring, but the tumor cells are
dumping suinic acid out. And not only
that, suxinic suinic acid stabilizes Hif
1 alpha, a major ankco gene. Uh the
stabilization of Hif 1 alpha allows the
glycolytic pathway to proceed at maximal
maximal uh efficiency uh turned on. So
the ankco genes that we have now found
out like Hif 1 alpha and mick. These
ankco genes are facilitators
of allowing the cell to shift to a
fermentation metabolism because oxfos
becomes chronically disrupted. uh ankco
genes turn on open the floodgates to get
glucose and glutamine into the cell to
replace to replace the we to replace the
um uh reduction in energy through
oxidative phosphorilation.
>> Well, I think this starts to bring us to
the idea that um I wanted to get to
which is you know we can juxtapose a
sematic mutation theory and a
mitochondrial meta metab metabolic
theory here for for ankcoenesis. But
these things are not mutually exclusive,
right? You can have metabolic shifts
that say generate reactive oxygen
species and lipid peroxides that then
mutate the DNA. And as you just
mentioned, you can apparently have DNA
mutations that actually then facilitate
or lock in metabolic shifts. Well, I
don't know if they're mutations. They're
when you when you when you uh this is
what Greg Smensa found when when when
oxygen uh becomes deprived uh hifin
alpha which is made and broken and made
and broken becomes becomes uh stabilized
and that immediately upregulates the
fermentation pathway. So it's not really
a mutation. It's
>> a gene expression change.
>> Yeah, it's it's a gene expression thing.
So uh so what happens is that you are
now allowing um ankco genes to be uh
expressed uh and and on and and of
course if the if the oxygen um comes
back the ankco genes are are are are
downregulated.
>> I see. So it's metabolic change in
tandem with epigenetic changes in
expression of genes rather than
mutations in the sequence itself.
>> Absolutely. Yes. So and and and and this
is what this is what was shown. Um when
when you take a cancer cell that has
ankco gene expression and you and you
have abnormal mitochondria in there,
deficient oxidative phosphorilation, you
see these ankco genes on and when you
put new mitochondria, the ankco genes
turn off because you don't need them
anymore because they're respiring.
So, but they are perhaps they're
essential to maintain viability of the
cell uh when oxidative phosphorilation
is in insufficient to maintain
viability. So, they'll do it.
>> So, one thing I want to ask you about um
because I want people to get this piece
because it it's important here, but it's
also just more generally important when
we're thinking about cell biology and
metabolism generally speaking. You
[snorts] mentioned the term coupling or
uncoupling. And a lot of as you just
told us um over the last few minutes a
lot of confusion in this field in the
cancer field arose because people didn't
understand the relationship between
oxygen and ATP production and how that
varied how tightly those things were
correlated or not under different
conditions and you said that the can
cancer cells are often relatively
uncoupled. When you say the word
coupling and uncoupling with respect to
mitochondria ATP production and oxygen
what does that mean? What is coupling?
Yeah. Yeah. Well, coupling means that
the that the uh that the um production
of ATP
through the F1 F-Zero ATPA, sometimes
they call it complex 5. It's a very
elaborate protein complex in the inner
membrane of the mitochondria that that
that proton motive gradient in that
builds up in the inner membrane space of
the mitochondria.
um uh the the ATP production is is
coupled to the to the um uh to the
degree of of proton protons uh
accumulating in the inner space. So so
uh those protons come passing back
through the f10 linked to the production
of ATP with oxygen pulling pulling the
electrons through all these all these
different proteins. So oxygen serving as
a as an a as an acceptor of electrons is
directly coupled to the production of
ATP through the have zero ATPAS.
>> So when this is happening when things
are tightly coupled oxygen it's almost
like a conveyor belt and oxygen is the
thing that's sort of making the conveyor
belt turn to generate the energy and so
you have very very maximally efficient
ATP production when you're in a tightly
coupled regime but then the extent that
the things become uncoupled what
happens?
>> Yeah. Well, here's the situ. But during
that cup, when you say that coupling,
it's not only the oxygen pulling the
electrons through the various protons of
the electron transport chain, that that
pulling of of electrons is is is linked
to the pumping of protons. So the
pulling of one pumps the other creating
the proton motive gradient, which is
then coupled to ATP production. It's
very an incredibly sophisticated
machinery. Um but when you have
uncoupling the proton mode of gradient
the the hydrogen protons pass back
through the membrane into the matrix.
>> So you're so you're leaking. Yes. You're
you're leaking. Now some some of them
some of these leakages can be directed
by uncoupling proteins. Uh and some of
these uncoupling proteins are actually
activated in cancer cells. So you're
dissipating the proton motive gradient,
the electrochemical gradient by by
dissipating that. That's called
uncoupling. And but it's a very
important natural part of normal cells
uh to be to know how to couple and
uncouple the membranes.
>> So in both directions it's regulated.
Sometimes a cell wants to be more
coupled or more uncoupled.
>> Uh it it has to be very carefully
regulated uh because uh this is the way
we produce heat. When we uncouple we
produce heat rather than ATP. So the the
the energy is is generated by ther
thermo regulation rather than ATP
production. But this in some tissues
allows us to do this depending on the
environmental situation. So it's a very
sophisticated system.
>> But in cancer it's broken.
>> Uh they're uncoupled and they're broken.
They're not they're not able to generate
an active bro gradient thereby leak
causing the cell to force into a
fermentation because as Warberg said
energy is everything. Without ATP,
nothing can survive. You must have ATP
to to allow all the gene expression
profiles. You have to have ATP. How is
that coming? H So, so how general is the
observation? How firm is the observation
that in cancer you tend to be more
uncoupled in your mitochondria than
coupled?
>> The evidence for that is the massive
production of reactive oxygen species.
>> So uncoupling tends to produce more
reactive oxygen species.
>> Yes. Yes. So you have to be very careful
about and cancer cells are known
>> to have a massive amount of of of the uh
the hydroxide radical and those are
those things are carcinogenic and
mutagenic.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So the DNA mutations that you see in
cancer cells many of them a lot of them
are are caused by the reactive oxygen.
>> So so are you saying so an implication
of that if I'm hearing this correctly is
that so if mitochondrial [snorts]
uncoupling leads to less efficient
energy production and it produces more
reactive oxygen species and things that
can cause mutations. Could it be true
that historical observations of Anka
genes and mutations this was actually a
downstream effect of this kind of
metabolic change that happened rather
than being sort of the cause?
>> Yeah, absolutely. That's it. That that
[laughter] that's that's one of the
things. And just like I said with the
nuclear transfer experiments, you
>> that would explain why in some cell
lines you see these mutations and some
you don't. It's because this was all
happening downstream of this
mitochondrial metabolic change and the
mutations aren't actually necessary but
they might be observed sometimes as a
consequence of the reactive oxygen
species production. Yeah. And not only
that also from the acidification of the
micro environment because what happens
when the cell the cancer cell is not
efficient in generating energy through
oxidative phosphorilation. Yes, it makes
a lot more reactive oxygen species which
further damage the ability of the uh uh
the efficiency of the electron transport
chain but but don't forget what are the
waste products of fermentation are
lactic acid and suinic acid which
acidify the micro environment creating
more disturbances in the nuclear genome.
So when people look at cancer, they
always say the nuclear genome is shot to
hell and it could be all varied in
different ways in different cells and
different conditions all very different
from each other.
>> So let me ask you this. This is just
something that's coming to mind
spontaneously for me. So [snorts] if all
if all of that is true then I think it
makes a very clear prediction with what
I'm about to ask you. So obviously the
extent to which our mitochondria are
coupled can change based on
environmental conditions. You know you
can become more or less coupled or
uncoupled. you know, at any given time.
That being said, there are maternal
hapllet types, so the type of
mitochondrial uh DNA and mitochondria
that you inherit from your mother that
are more intrinsically coupled or
uncoupled. Some of us have a have a
mitochondrial hletype that makes us tend
to be very very coupled and some of us
have one that tends to make us more
uncoupled. Is it known whether people
with more intrinsically coupled
mitochondrial hlet types tend to get
cancer at lower rates?
Uh the answer is I don't know. Okay. I I
think that question needs to be looked
at a little bit more carefully.
Now knowing that that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder, that
type of question should be uh looked at
in a little bit more in a little bit
more uh serious way.
>> But you think is that is that a good
question or a good way to think about
it?
>> I think I think it needs to be looked
at. I I certainly think there needs to
be some some evaluation of that. It was
never really thought about. If you think
the disorder is caused by somatic
mutations, your your entire academic
focus is on something other than that.
>> Right?
>> So, uh now that once you realize that
there's a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder, questions like that now become
interesting. Let's go back and let's go
back and see if we can look at that. And
we know that yes the the the haploype
that those mitochondria are eventually
distributed to all all different uh
cells and tissues uh in in our body and
they all have different levels of
uncoupling as part of their natural
environment and what they do in those
organs. Uh so some are generated from
more heat, others are more capable of of
of of coupling than uncoupling and all
of that are the sophistication and
modifications of mitochondrial function
ending up in different tissues and
organs of our of our body. Uh and so we
need to we need to look at that. We we
know that cancer cells can there there's
um substrate level phosphorilation is an
absolute absolute essential cap um
phenotype for having disregulated cell
growth and and and the rarity of cancer
in neurons of the brain and in card
mature cardomyioytes they are they are
uncap incapable of shifting to substrate
level phosphorilation. So you rarely if
ever get cancers in cells that cannot
ferment. Um but the level of uncoupling
that would allow the the the variability
in cells needs to be looked at uh uh
more more carefully. Mo the most
important thing again you how do we how
do we connect this to disregulated
cell growth. Okay we great we have all
this it turns out and very clearly uh
that the proton motive gradient in the
mitochondria through calcium signaling
controls the cell cycle. So the cell
cycle uh uh when how how how we should
divide and how we should become dormant
and quscent is all under the control of
the calcium gradients within the within
the mitochondria. So what happens when
that mitochondria loses its capability
of producing energy efficiently? The
cell falls back on its default state
which is proliferation. All cells when
life first emerged on our planet. There
was no oxygen in the atmospheres. Yet
yet uh we had cells that were dividing
and they were disregulated in their cell
growth out of control. And as Albert
Senurgi said this alpha period of life
on Earth was purely
unbridled proliferation driven by
fermentation metabolism. There was no
oxygen in the atmosphere. So it was only
the fusion of the archaobacteria that
was actually able to capture uh oxygen
and then lead to the mezzone
multisellular organism. Before that
everything was a single cell. So these
cancer cells are simply falling back on
ancient fermentation pathways that were
present or all cells prior to the oxygen
coming into the atmosphere.
>> It's the default state because that
literally was what came first from an
evolutionary perspective.
>> Yes. And the default state of cells is
proliferation. And the default energy
state is substrate level phosphorilation
because there was no oxidative
phosphorilation. And these cancer cells
are falling back and they will grow out
of control as long as they have fuels to
ferment. And the two fuels that have
been identified, we interrogated all
these are glucose and glutamine.
>> Glucose and glutamine. And so that's a
sugar and that's an amino acid. Neither
of those obviously is a fatty acid.
>> No fat. they can't burn fatty acids.
They accumulate lipid droplets in the
cytoplasm. So, uh you need a good
mitochondria to burn fatty acids and and
what happens? You see all these cancer
cells loaded with lipid droplets and
those are the fatty acids that can't be
metabolized.
>> I see. Okay. So, I was looking at that
figure in one of your papers. These lip
these big bubbles of fat accumulate in
these cancer cells and you're just
saying that's fat that's accumulating
because the cell can't actually use it
for energy production.
>> Absolutely. And and and in fact, if you
take cells and put them in hypoxia, they
start accumulating lipid droplets and as
soon as the oxygen comes back, the lipid
droplets disappear.
>> Wow. So, this is immediately make So, so
here's where my mind's going. There's a
couple ways we can take this, but here's
one way that connects to other podcasts
I've done. So, I I became really
interested in um lipid peroxidation and
how that relates to dietary fat intake.
And there's been some interesting
observations recently in the literature.
people like um Timmy Aman and
Holidayiday at the University of South
Florida, they have observed that these
that colon cancer basically is seems to
be coming from these highly inflammatory
states that are closely linked to lipid
dysregulation.
And what you're telling me is, you know,
if you're right that mitochondrial
metabol metabolism gets disrupted, you
can't use oxidative phosphorilation as
well. you can't oxidize fatty acids as
well. You start making more reactive
oxygen species. This will increase the
odds that you will create lipid
peroxides that are toxic to the cell.
And you know, if I go back to the
Holiday and Yateman work, if your cells
have accumulated a lot of say
polyunsaturated fatty acids, you've just
got more stuff now that can be turned
into toxic lipid peroxides from reactive
oxygen species. And so I'm starting to
connect some dots here for how things in
the lipid literature and and and and
that stuff relate to ankcoenesis based
on the the mitochondrial issue that that
you've been talking about.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And and and the the
key lipid in the inner membrane of the
mitochondria is cardioipin uh which is
polyunsaturated and and you start Ross
damaging those and you start to reduce
the energy efficiency of the electron
transport chain the efficiency. So yes,
you're going to see a lot of and you do
see all this when you do really careful
examinations of lipid bio like we have
done in shotgun lipidomics. We see all
kinds of lipid abnormalities uh in these
cancer cells any one of which could be
produced by by peroxidations and all
these kinds of things and they just
contribute to the inflammatory cascade
that's going on uh in this and then what
happens is you you you create what we
call a wounding. It's like the body, the
immune system sees that abnormality as a
wound and they come in and they throw
cytoines and growth factors on top of
this which creates then a worse
situation. They're doing uh things out
of context uh creating making a bad
situation uh much much worse. So uh you
can see that and then we showed how that
leads to metastasis because the immune
cells start to fuse with these cancer
stem cells uh leading to uh abnormal
immune cell function leading to spread
of cancer cells around the body all
driven by by by glucose and glutamine.
So the the way we know we're right is by
the response of patients to targeting
glutamine glucose and glutami glucose
and glutamine at the same time by
transitioning the whole body over to
therapeutic ketosis. The cancer cells
can't burn fatty acids or ketone bodies
and they're dependent on on glucose and
glutamine for their disregulated growth.
>> Is that generally true? No cancer can
burn fatty acids.
>> No, because they accumulate them in the
lipid droplets. They they can't you have
in fact we throw it out to the field.
Anybody who can show us a cancer cells
that can grow on fatty acids or ketones
in the absence of fermentable fuels,
I'll give them a hundred bucks. I have
[laughter] the powers here. Yeah. Guess
what? No. In fact, one of my colleagues
said I'll give you a thousand bucks. the
cancer cell can't grow without
fermentable fuels. It's you can't burn.
Fatty acids are non- fermentable.
>> Okay. So, so this brings us to now the
question of well, so there's two
questions I want to get to. We're going
to have to take them separately. So,
[snorts] there's the question of if you
put a if you put people into ketosis
with a ketogenic diet, to what extent
can this prevent or treat existing
cancers? And then there's the question
that we have to get to eventually, which
is if broken energy production in the
mitochondria is a cause of cancer, we
have to then ask, well, what's breaking
the the mitochondria to begin with?
Let's take those one at a time. So talk
a little bit more about ketosis and the
use of a ketogenic diet say as a cancer
prevention or treatment modality. Well,
I you know I years ago when I did the
calorie restriction stuff I I said well
you know how when we did the comparative
analysis of mouse and human you have to
understand basil metabolic rate the
basil metabolic rate of a mouse is seven
times that of of of a of a human. So
when we were getting these spectacular
responses to calorie restriction in the
mouse we said wow wow we let's see how
do we have to how do we translate that
over the human it's water only fasting.
So I said, "Oh my god." Because we saw
water only fast in the human produces
the same biochemical parameter changes
you see in a mouse under 40% calorie
restriction. So we thought, "Oh, just
cut down your food by 40%. You'll get
what this mouse does." No, no, no. You
got to go water only fasting because
there's differences in basil metabolic
rate. So I said, "Wow, that that ain't
going to fly." Uh how many people with
cancer are going to say, "I now I got to
not eat for 14 20 days. Just drink
water." People don't want to do that. So
we were working with the ketogenic diet
and epilepsy and the little kids were
seem to be okay with that. So we said
why don't we try to because people that
seems at least you're eating something
you're not like feeling you're going to
starve to death and then we started to
work the ketogenic diets our knowledge
of ketogenic diets for epilepsy applied
to the to the cancer problem and that
seemed to be a viable solution until
everybody went nuts about eating lard
and doing all this crazy stuff uh with
ketogenic diets. But what it actually
does is a paleolithic diet uh which we
realized can put you into nutritional
ketosis if you eat um foods that are low
in carbohydrates, restricted amounts of
highly uh uh restricted carbohydrates.
Uh you can get into a nutrition state of
nutritional ketosis just like our
paleolithic ancestors where there was no
highly processed carbs uh and and and
foods that would raise blood sugar
levels uh very high. So exercise and low
carbohydrates will put you into a state
of nutritional uh ketosis. Now that
state is very very uh good for the
normal cells of our body because we uh
my my late friend uh Richard Vch Hans
Krebs's last student and I would talk
for hours about the value of ketone
bodies being a super fuel. They generate
more ATP without producing reactive
oxygen species. Unbelievable. So we can
transition the whole body over to
ketones making the rest of the body
super healthy reducing systemic
inflammation a fuel that the tumor cells
can't can't use. So uh how do we do
that? Uh and the answer is we we can
take like on our recent Greek study you
should see this we were able to keep
these G glyopblasto patients alive for
three years or longer on these on these
Mediterranean ketogenic
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet was
un it was tremendous. So there's so many
ways to get into nutritional ketosis,
not uh not just using ketogenic diets.
You can you can use low carbohydrate
diets. Your body will start producing
ketones naturally uh from these from
these situation.
>> So that's what that's what we're doing.
We're we're we're transitioning people
to nutritional ketosis uh which lowers
glucose and replaces glucers blood sugar
and replaces the the sugar with ketones.
The brain can burn it, heart can burn
it, muscles can burn it. uh cancers
cannot burn it and then we have to go
after the glutamine targeting uh with
drugs because we we target we have to
target the glutamine with drugs and
exercise.
>> So so is the essence of what you're
saying here or part of it that if
[snorts] you put someone into
nutritional ketosis they're using ketone
bodies like BHB to generate energy much
more so than they're using glucose
because it's a very ultra low carb diet
and you're getting a high fat intake.
So, is what you're saying that you're
essentially because cancer cells can't
use those fatty acids that you're
essentially starving them, but your
other non-cancer cells are not starved
because they can use those ketone
bodies. Yes, it's a transition. Our body
evolved. We're we're a very versatile
machine. We have survived on this planet
under the most stringent conditions.
We're all alive today because of the
flexibility of our bioenergetic systems.
The cancer cell have compromised that
bioenergetic system by having
dysfunctional oxidative phosphorilation,
pigeon holing them into a fermentation
metabolism.
>> So they're metabolically inflexible,
which is the very adaptation that is
part of what makes us human in many
ways. You could argue.
>> Yeah. Perfectly. Yes. And yet the cancer
field says, "Oh, cancer cells are so
flexible. They're so versatile." Because
you're always giving them fermentable
fuels. As long as they have fermentable
fuels, they'll appear to be very tough.
And
>> so you said you said something earlier.
So you said the ketones uh I want to ask
so so pound for pound if you're giving a
cell ketone bodies as opposed to
glucose. How is how much ATB can be
produced from the ketone bodies molecule
for molecule compared to glucose and how
much reactive oxygen species are kicked
out when you use one substrate versus
the other. Okay, let's let's our our
bodies will make ketones in the liver.
So you will mobilize the triglycerides
out of the out of the atapost cells and
they'll go into as as insulin goes down
glucagon the hormone that
triggers the mobilization of fats out of
atyposytes goes up. So our bloodstream
starts to fill up with with um um uh
triglycerides. You can see it on the TLC
plates. We did it. Uh and those
triglycerides then go to the liver and
the liver takes the two um glycerol
backbones and makes actually can make a
glucose molecule through
gluconneogenesis. But that level of
glucose is just residual because the
brain will suck up like a like a vacuum
any any available glucose. Um so and
then the the the it's like putting fatty
acids into a wood chipper. uh you the
liver chops them up into water soluble
ketone bodies which now circulate
through the through the bloodstream and
go to all tissues that that have
adequate oxidative phosphorilation. So
so where are we getting uh our energy
from is a ketone body. Now let's get
back to the why the ketone body is such
a powerful fuel and go now we're because
they have more carbon hydrogen bonds
than does a pyuvate and now I'm going to
explain this to you. So, so uh we get
more uh reducing equivalence NADH out of
a ketone body than we do out of a
pyuvate molecule. So, we're we're
producing the fuel for
a greater amount of fuel for oxidative
phosphorilation by burning a ketone
body. Number one. Uh number two, ketone
bodies deliver all their electrons to
complex one with very little being
delivered to complex two. So we create a
a more oxidized co-enzyme Q couple
>> which leads to an efficiency that proton
mode of gradient will go up ever so
slightly without a without uh uh they do
not uncouple. So um ketone bodies do not
uncouple. So
>> So you're saying you're saying ketones
if you're on a ketogenic diet your
body's using ketones that promotes
greater coupling in the mitochondria.
>> Yes. a a a 28% better coupling than
pyuvate. Now, people will say, well, why
don't you burn fatty acids? Because they
have a lot more carbon hydrogen bonds um
than than does the ketone body or the
pyuvate. And what happens is they create
a very steep proton motive gradient
almost like then you the body has to
release the pressure. So, they
automatically turn on uh uncoupling
proteins naturally. So they dissipate
the proton motor gradient uh reducing
the delta G- prime ATP hydraulic even
though they have more carbon hydrogen
bonds. It's too steep. It's too steep
and the body the they naturally open up
uh uncoupling uh regulated uncoupling
proteins thereby reducing the efficiency
of energy with the fatty acid. uh the
ketone body does not uncouple produces
very few oxygen radicals and has more uh
carbon hydrogen bond does the pyuvate
thereby calling it a super fuel for each
breath of oxygen you take in burning
ketones you get more power from from
from from that bioenergetic efficiency
of a ketone body this is unbelievable
>> are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Cipher on metabolic therapy
and cancer. So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rockermeer, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way.
Whether you're new to the subject or a
seasoned enthusiast, our books offer
insights that can change your life.
Ready to explore this transformative
knowledge? Visit our website at
www.cancer as a metabolic disease.com to
get your copy. You can buy the ebook
there directly and the paperbook via the
provided links. Here's the best part. A
portion of every purchase goes directly
to support Dr. Thomas Safereed's
groundbreaking research. That's why the
direct ebook purchase is the best option
to donate as much as possible. You can
see all of the donations Mr. Rocker has
already made at www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just
>> So this allow this allowed us to survive
the most harsh conditions of famine and
and droughts and all this because we're
able to shift from one fuel source to
the other for and our brain is naturally
capable of burning ketones. They burn
sugar.
They burn glucose and they burn ketone
bodies. But we are we are capable of
transitioning our nervous system over to
ketone bodies. So so that that keeps us
alive and functional.
>> So So some people argue, well, if you
give the body, the human body, glucose
and ketones, if you give it
carbohydrates and fats, it will
preferentially burn the carbohydrates
and therefore that's what our cells want
and that's the better fuel supply. What
do you make of that argument?
>> Well, I think that's true in part not
because it's a better fuel fuel supply.
Uh is is that when you take in
carbohydrates, you turn off glucagon.
Insulin goes up, glucagon goes down, you
piss out the ketones. So, it's the way
the body is is is utilizing this. You
have to look at the hormonal balance.
When you're in nutritional ketosis,
insulin is low, glucagon is elevated. As
soon as those carbs come in, insulin
goes up, glucagon goes down. You don't
need the brain will preferentially burn
burn burn glucose for sure,
>> but but but it has the capability of
adapting to ketones slowly. That's why
you can't go oh real real quick.
>> Yeah. So So I'm going to give you sort
of my take on some of this and I would
love to get your reaction to it. So a
lot of people love to get into the holy
wars of carbohydrates are a better
substrate, fatty acids are a better
substrate, ketosis is better,
carbohydrates are better. My sort of
view when I take an evolutionary lens to
look at how humans evolved and the
metabolic f the remarkable metabolic
flexibility that we have [snorts]
whether or not you know one group of
humans ate a ketogenic diet or a high
carbohydrate diet or whatever I think in
pre-industrial times in paleolithic
times for most of human evolution
people were transitioning from one
metabolic state to another probably on a
seasonal basis at least and so in some
sense It's not that we're supposed to be
in ketosis all the time. We're supposed
to be in carb burn all the time, but I
think we're probably adapted to switch
between these on a seasonal basis and as
a function of the feast and famine
cycles that naturally happened for most
of human history. And so, it's actually
the metabolic flexibility and the
switching between states that might be
the thing to focus on here rather than
trying to pigeon hole people as being,
you know, we we should eat carbohydrates
or we should eat fats all the time.
Yeah, you're you're you're 100% right on
that. We have to look at our
evolutionary past and who were we as a
species. Yes, we were feast and famine
and and during seasonal periods when
fruits were ripe and you had more more
carbohydrate people and ripe berries and
all this kind of stuff, uh you would you
would gravitate uh towards that. And
that's the beauty of our body. It's a
very flexible machine. Uh we we evolved
to be extremely flexible in how we
during seasonal times, exercise, all
this kind of stuff. The tumor cell is
not flexible. So, it cannot make those
transitions readily. If you're locking a
body into a low carbohydrate diet and in
a ketosis, yeah, it's going to put
pressure on the tumor cell, but then if
you switch to a high carbohydrate diet
really well, the body knows how to do
this the normal cells, but the tumor
cell, even though you'd be giving it the
fuel, it it can't make the the rapid
transition. So you can just go up and
down as long as you know how to use this
is why we developed the glucose ketone
index calculator which will be the new
tool uh for managing cancer and chronic
disease in the population. This is a
ratio of circulating glucose to
circulating ketones and it comes out as
a as a ratio and we know that we we
exist in certain zones in our life uh
that put us at risk. uh if we have high
GKI all the time, we put ourselves at
risk for a broad range of chronic
diseases and mitochondrial damage as as
the result of a variety of insults on
the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation. But if we go down into
the the green zone, which is a GK of 2.0
and below, we're going to put a world of
hurt on these cancer cells. But how long
do we stay in the green zone before we
flip back up to a yellow? In other
words, going up and down because our
bodies just like just like you said,
Nick, we evolved to be in these
different states uh seasonally. Uh where
the cancer cells are not flexible, but
our bodies are flexible and we can
actually eliminate these tumor cells
gradually by taking the full power of
the health ability of our body and
marginalizing these these tumor cells
out of existence. So you're right, we
need to know about how our bodies work.
What is what does it mean to be in metab
metabolic homeostasis?
uh what do we do in these how does our
body maintain homeo homeostatic home
metabolic homeostasis in different in
different zones of the glucose ketone
index and this is you know we're working
with Greg Glassman former owner of the
CrossFit and Emily Kumer Kaplan we're
going to build these METFIX boxes uh
where we're going to be able to train
people to know how to use the GL glucose
ketone index uh monitor to put
themselves into different zones
switching from from the zones that you
that you have mentioned to make our
lives more meaningful. Uh but knowing
that we can uh by moving in and out of
these zones, we can we can keep
ourselves at a at a much a much higher
state of of of of health. And we would
have it on our cell phones so that we
can then monitor on the cell phone at
any given time what your GKI is and
knowing what zone you're in relatively
uh on that particular day and how long
you want to stay in these dangerous
zones and how long you want to stay in
that super healthy zones becomes a
personal choice.
So if to the extent that broken
mitochondrial metabolism underlies
cancer because uh if you can't use
oxidative phosphorilation effectively
you're going to use these more
evolutionarily primitive forms of energy
production like glycolysis. You're
saying cancer cells exhibit that more.
They're not using oxidative
phosphorilation as much. To the extent
that's true, it begs the question of
what is breaking mitochondrial
metabolism and the ability to use
oxidative phosphorilation to begin with.
Do we know what some of the major
drivers are there for that disruption?
>> Yeah, we know most of them. And this was
uh Albert Surgis's ankcoenic paradox
which we solved in the in which we've
already solved. He was always
mysterious. He was always like, whoa,
you almost anything you you've
identified can cause cancer at one one
form or another. What's the common
pathofysiological mechanism leading to
chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation? So when I did in my
book in 2012, I went back and looked at
chemical carcinogens and a lot of these
chemical carcinogens cause
autofllororesence in the mitochondria uh
leading to disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation. Ankcoenic viruses uh
like papilloma virus, hepatitis C vi
these viruses either enter the
mitochondria themselves or the products
produced in the nucleus go to the
mitochondria to disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation. um radiation we know
intermittent hypoxia we know rare uh in
chronic inflammation C reactive protein
elevations of C reactive protein linked
to systemic inflammation systemic
inflammation chronically damages the
efficiency of oxidative phosphorilation
um rare inherited mutations like people
say oh what about BA 1 what about the uh
what about PE relief ramen many what
about the uh you know retinol blast
these are known genetic uh risk factors
Every one of those risk factors damages
oxidative phosphorilation in one way or
another. So they're and none of them are
100% penetrate, meaning they're
secondary risk factors. You know why
some woman with a with a BA1 mutation uh
gets cancer and another one with the
same mutation never gets cancer. So uh
because whatever only the ones that have
cancer have oxidative phosphorilation
dysfunction coupled to a sub secondary
fermentation. So what you're saying what
you're saying is the reason that those
BRCA mutations famously link to breast
cancer is not because 100% of the breast
cancers require those mutations. It's
because if you have the mutation, it
indicates you definitely have that
mitochondrial dysfunction. But even if
you don't have that mutation, you can
still have mitochondrial dysfunction,
which is why you observe both the
mutation and the absence of the mutation
with breast cancer.
>> Yes. That's and and also 50% of the
women that have the mutation
uh get get breast cancer but but 50% of
them that have the mutation do not get
breast cancer. So why do the women with
the have the mutation don't get breast
cancer? It seems that in those women the
mutation was never capable of damaging
oxidative phosphorilation even though
the mutation was there. Oxfos continued
to function effectively in the presence
of the mutation. People say well what
could cause that? Well, in genetics,
we've known for we know what we call
suppressor genes. These are these are
other genes in the genome that suppress
the action of one gene. So, how does
suppressor genes work to to reduce
penetrance of some of these uh inherited
risk factors? And the answer is uh we
don't know precisely uh how that works
but but certainly an area of very
interesting uh study you know why why
should somebody with a you know with a
leaf rail many leaf many is the is the
most penetrant of all the inherited risk
factors and it's it codes for um
cytochrome synthesis of cytochrome C2 uh
which affects the electron transport
chain that's about 90% penetrint well
what explains the 10% that have the
mutation that don't get any cancers uh
maybe a suppressor gene or something.
Also, it allows us to now know that if
this is the case, we can use uh diet and
lifestyle to reduce the risk of even the
inherited uh risk factors. So, we we
have more control. Uh bottom line is
once you know cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease, you have a much
greater control as to whether or not
you're going to get a cancer.
>> So, there's many different ways to break
mitochondrial metabolism. That's part of
what you were just saying. you know, age
is a factor, inflammation, pathogens,
hypoxia, you name it. There's there's,
you know, chemical exposures can break.
All of these things can break
mitochondrial metabolism, even though
they're very different things. [snorts]
>> Another thing I want to mention here is,
you know, as we alluded to earlier, the
mitochondria are endo symbiotic in
origin. They used to be free living
cyanobacteria, but that got engulfed
somehow by our cells. [snorts] And they
are because of their origin in that way,
they are light sensitive. So, they're
modulated by light. And obviously one of
the ways the physical environment is
very different today than it was for our
paleolithic ancestors is that the light
environment is very different. The
pattern and intensity of different
wavelengths of light that we're exposed
to are different and the mitochondria
are light sensitive. What do we know
about light and its ability to drive
messed up mitochondrial metabolism?
Well, that that might come through um um
the um melanin uh
melatonin the these kinds of light
sensitive hormones. Uh yes, we we
evolved in a light dark cycle. Uh light
is extremely important for the normal
circadian rhythms. Normal circadian
rhythms maintain mitochondrial function.
So if we're if we're exposed to uh le
having less exposure to light than our
than our ancestors did, it it's just one
more of the stress factors that uh
contribute to mitochondrial uh oxidative
phosphorilation dysfunction. Yes. A very
important m it links to the circadian
rhythms. You say we we say today what's
what's responsible for the the cancer
epidemic with we have one we have uh
618,000
people are predicted to die in 2025
uh from cancer which comes down to 1,700
people a day uh or 70 people per hour
are expected to die this year uh from
from cancer. Clearly, clearly we're
we're we're in an epidemic of of of of
of this of unhealth. Okay. So, you have
light sensitivity. You you you have poor
a lot of highly processed carbohydrates
that are minimally nutritionally of
value that create uh systemic
inflammation. You have lack of exercise.
You have emotional stress. Whether
you're sitting in traffic, you're
looking at the computer, you're looking
at your cell phone all day long. uh you
have poor sleep as the result of the uh
uh circadian rhythm disruption. Uh you
you put all those factors together and
you have an epidemic not only of cancer
but of all these chronic diseases as
well. Type 2 diabetes, uh you have
obesity, uh you you have cardiovascular
disease, you have cancer, you have the
whole package, dementia. You put all
those things together and the and the
majority of our chronic diseases
including cancer are the result of
mitochondrial dysfunction coupled to a
substrate level phosphorilation
contributed by a whole variety of
different factors uh in the environment.
This is called the ankogenic paradox.
That's why we solve this. And then you
can use a glucose ketone index to bring
yourself back into these uh healthier
zones. So do what you need to do to get
light to to reduce your stress to get
more exercise and you bring yourself
back into a more normal zone thereby
reducing cancer risk and and and and and
chronic disease risk. So so clearly we
have a clear strategy. The question is
can the American public recognize this
and now and now take steps to prevent
cancer and if you do get cancer how to
manage it and prevent other chronic
diseases.
I want to ask you some more details
about therapeutic ketogenic diets such
as those that that you and others have
used um in this area of research. So
there's many different ketogenic diets
one could eat. And what I mean by that
is you know the fatty acid profile of
your ketogenic diet could be very
different from someone else's. You might
be having highsaturated fat, high
polyunsaturated fat, monounsaturated uh
all the different combinations thereof.
We mentioned earlier that
polyunsaturated fatty acids they can be
oxidized readily by reactive oxygen
species and this produces toxic uh
byproducts reactive aldahhides and
things like this that damage cell
components and we you know we alluded to
some other work that's been done related
to that stuff. When you guys use a
therapeutic ketogenic diet, what are the
specific fatty acid profiles that you
use and what's important to think about
here in terms of fatty acid composition
from saturated to more unsaturated fats?
Well, this the saturated fats uh
mediumchain triglycerides are are more
provocative for bu building nice uh
ketone bodies than polyunsaturated fatty
acids. Polyunsaturated fatty acids can
give uh flexibility to membranes like
olive oils and things like this. I mean
there's there's a number of
polyunsaturated fatty acids that are
very fish oils and things like this uh
that are very healthy for you. Um but to
make ketones and the answer is uh we we
use we use mono um mediumchain
triglycerides, avocados, we try to get
we try to do it with as much natural uh
fatty acids as possible. Always calorie
restricting them. always using the
glucose ketone index which is the ratio
of circulating ketones to glucose as
kind of a guide. Uh so um people say we
use the GKI more uh to know what zone
you're in uh as opposed to the types of
fatty acids that you are consuming. But
we but we know there are natural ways to
get ketones ketogenesis natural ketosis.
uh you're mobilizing the fats
predominantly out of your uh uh
atyposytes, but at the same time, if you
take in a diet with mediumchain
triglycerides, whether it comes from a
plant or an animal, uh you'll get you'll
produce better uh all natural ketone
bodies. And again, it should be done
under low glucose because the lower the
glucose, the more the need for the body
to make ketones uh from the liver. So,
um and you're you're right about that. I
mean, we're experimenting more with
that. what are the best diets to produce
the most natural forms of ketone bodies
again with understanding calorie
restriction and using the GKI as a
quantitative measure. So, we no longer
need to be in a mysterious state. Oh, I
think I'm in ketosis by pissing on some
strip or blowing out some some thing. We
actually have a ratio now that is based
on blood on blood. Uh we have a glucose
continuous monitor. Now, we're going to
eventually we'll have glucose ketone
continuous monitors. So, we'll be able
to know precisely what level of ketosis
we're in and the types of fatty acids
that we can consume to bring us into
these zones in a healthy state.
>> Okay. But it it sounds like in essence
what you're saying is that okay, the
ketogenic diet is a highfat, ultra- low
carb diet. You're going to use those
fats to make ketones for energy as
opposed to glucose. But those ketones,
those fatty acids that you're using for
energy, those are more readily made from
shorter chain smaller fatty acids.
Whereas the longer chain polyunsaturated
fat fatty acids are more likely to be
used for like membrane structures and
things like that.
>> Yeah, that's true. Um they're
[clears throat] not burned uh as readily
as the as the other fatty acids, but
some of them are are unhealthy like you
mentioned. They can create inflammation
like arachidonic acid uh 24. uh that's a
provocative inflammatory uh fatty acid
used for um you know inflam inflammatory
uh conditions where others uh like
omega-3s are used for anti-inflammatory
uh activities.
>> So it it sounds like you would not
recommend someone to have a very high
omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid
content in their ketogenic diet.
>> Um yeah, I I think we need to work
better on that. I I think I think we
need to be more cognizant of the foods.
Uh ultimately we're going to be taking
in the food. We want to have uh a food
menu that is palatable and therapeutic
at the same time. Um and that's where uh
food science and technology uh will
start making their move into this into
this space into this zone uh improving
uh uh making natural ketone bodies more
efficiently from foods that are known to
be healthy
>> uh as opposed to those that are not
being healthy. And I think that's a an
area that will be exploding uh here in
in the next uh several years and and
we're going to have the quantitative
biomarkers to to let people know. Number
one, how do you feel? What state are you
in? Oh, you know, it's like
unbelievable. So, uh and and it might be
different from one person to another. We
can't group. We we have people that are
different in age, in gender, in culture,
in religion. uh all of these will have
to be uh recognized when we're building
these new uh strategies uh for managing
chronic disease. So this is the future.
Uh right now you just have to have the
platform the bedrock upon which to build
all these in a logical way. Um
recognizing that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder now
allows us to shift uh to logical
science-based strategies for managing
this. And of course the chronic disease
world will be dragged along uh with this
because the cancer is recognized as the
number one fearful disease in the world.
It's not getting better, it's getting
worse. When someone is diagnosed with
diabetes, uh they they don't feel like
like the uh angel of death is looking
over their shoulder. When you get
cancer, you know, you're looking at the
grim reaper. Well, this this has all got
to change. Uh yes, it'll be an
unfortunate diagnosis, but we have a
clear strategy on how to manage that
without collateral toxicity. There
should be none of these medieval
treatments of of of poisonous chemicals,
surgical mutilations the way we're doing
it and incinerating radiations. I mean,
we can use all of those strategies, but
now they have to be recognized to be
used in a very different plan than they
are currently being used. So I I'm very
hopeful for the future of managing not
only cancer but m m m m m m m m m m m m
m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m
m m m m m m m m multiple other chronic
diseases and giving individuals the tool
to know uh that they'll now be able to
take much greater charge uh over their
existence because they'll have the
definite tools and know what to do and
how to do it. And that's a personal
choice and you can either do it or not
do it. It's not we're not forcing
anybody. We're not going to tell anybody
don't eat that, don't eat this. You just
look at the GKI monitor. will tell you
whether you should eat it or not. You
make the choice for yourself.
>> Um
I want to zoom out a little bit. So
cancer at the level of society, where
are we with cancer in terms of, you
know, how common it is and whether or
not certain cancers are becoming more
common today than they used to be? Can
you give us a general sense of that?
>> Yeah, the general sense is that it's
becoming more and more in younger
people. I I I I I I think uh I'm not
sure we're seeing it. I'm seeing it. I I
you know I I get calls and emails all
the time from young people asking me to
help them with transitioning to
metabolic therapy. Uh and we give them a
net a planned. We've written we we've
written a very comprehensive treatment
protocol for managing glyopblastoma
which could be used for any cancer. But
we're seeing so many people in the late
20s and early 30s now with colon cancer,
breast cancer, uh various types of
cancers where we would never see that
many in the past. And and I and as I
said when when this new big paper we put
out uh on on uh the Warberg hypothesis
and the emergence of the mitochondrial
metabolic theory, we have a big section
in there where we've now incorporated
forever chemicals and microlastics
and these kinds of things that are now
entering our environment in greater
amounts than we had in the past. You you
couple that with an obesity epidemic
where where chronic disease C reactive
protein is now elevated and you combine
that with these these uh other things
and I think that could account in large
part for why we're seeing cancer at
younger and younger ages uh in these
people. So everything is related to our
metabolic homeostasis and the exposures
that we're getting for provocative
agents that will chronically disrupt
oxidative phosphorilation. Hm. When
[snorts] we go back and we think about
the sociology and the history of science
piece of this that we were talking about
towards the beginning, [snorts] it
reminded me of the saga of the diet
heart hypothesis and Ancel Keys that
many have talked about in in the diet
world where, you know, long story short,
you know, my interpretation of all of
that I share with many people is that,
you know, Ancel Keys's ideas became
dominant not because they won a
scientific battle on a level playing
field, but largely because uh of social
and political influence. influence the
right people in the right positions uh
uh championed those ideas. They
suppressed alternative ideas that they
were competing against through
artificial means and those ideas became
enshrined at the level of public policy
such that for decades at a time, you
know, the the food pyramid and all that
stuff was constructed with this one
model being treated as unassalable fact
when in fact it was just one model that
never had uh a total true consensus
behind it. And I couldn't help but but
notice that in the Warberg cancer
biology saga that you told us about,
something similar happened where the
ideas weren't competing head-to-head on
a pure scientific basis, but they sort
of moved and became more prominent for
social and political reasons.
>> Yeah, I think so. U but this is the
nature of of the way we move forward. uh
uh and as I said during the Capernacian
revolution uh that was not taken lightly
uh by by the Catholic Church and other
other uh religious organizations. Um and
led to a lot of upheaval uh in in the
way uh people uh and and uh and the way
establishments viewed uh their position
in in in in the world. And I think I
think the the um paradigm shift for
cancer going from a from a genetic
disease uh to a mitochondrial metabolic
disease uh will have uh every bit of of
of of uh of tumultuous change as did the
capernician revolution because if in
those days it wasn't if you thought the
sun was the center of the solar system
or the earth whether you dis agreed or
disagreed it wasn't associated with with
1,700 people a day dying. Our
misunderstanding of this situation today
uh uh that cancer is a genetic disease
is absolutely responsible for the 1,700
people a day dying. Those people are
dying because they're be being viewed as
having something other than what they
have. They do not have a genetic
disease. So these precision medicines
that are all based on the sematic
mutation theory are in are indirectly
allowing the the the field not to move
forward. And as a result, we're getting
all these poor people that are dying. So
the consequences of not knowing what
you're talking about scientifically have
dire dire consequences for people. The
suffering and death is enormous that
we're seeing with this cancer today. And
that's all because they refuse to accept
the Warberg and the the idea that this
is a mitochondrial metabolic disease.
Revenue generation is more important
than patient outcome. We know this for a
fact. The National Cancer Institute says
it's a genetic disease funding millions
of dollars in grant support on on a
flawed theory. So, we're getting more
and more dead people based on a lack of
knowledge or or ideological dogma uh
that's preventing the transition and and
th this is this is tragic a tragedy of
greatest proportion. Mhm. So, so with
your view of mitochondrial metabolism
taking center stage in terms of cancer,
what are some of the best and simplest
ways people can manage their lives to
prevent cancer? Would you re would you
say that people should be um going into
ketosis one way or another at least
intermittently as part of their
strategy?
>> I I think so. And exercise plays a
session. All we're doing is bringing
ourselves back occasionally to the
paleolithic period where cancer did not
was not prevalent. How do we know that
from the work of Albert Schwitzer
looking at tribes of people that live
according to their traditional ways? So,
so yes, I agree. I think that as long as
we are aware of what of what we need to
do and how to do it, then it becomes our
our job to to act upon that. Um but
right now I the misinformation
associated with with the food pyramids
and with the with what cancer is this
level of misinformation is causing a
tragic consequence to the health and
vitality of our population. So uh so
yeah we can prevent cancer if you can
keep your mitochondria healthy. It's
very hard to get cancer when
mitochondria healthy because
mitochondrial dysfunction is the origin
of cancer. So maintaining metabolic
homeostasis is absolutely essential for
preventing cancer and other chronic
diseases. So it's not bad luck. It's not
this crazy nonsense that you hear about
people talking about. It's our it's our
it's our diet lifestyle issues that
predominantly are responsible for our
our our health. But at least if we have
tools to put us into zones that we know
about, then it becomes up to us that we
have greater control over our destiny.
anything you want to reiterate or or any
final thoughts you want to leave people
with about what we discussed around
cancer and metabolism?
>> No, I think you know you you've done a
wonderful job uh getting down into the
nitty-gritty. Most folks that I talk
about on these podcasts uh we rarely
have an opportunity uh to go down into a
deeper uh a deeper level uh of our
understanding. You you you have to
realize that in our lab here at Boston
College, this is all we do. We discuss
these things day and night, night and
day. We have groups here. All we do is
sit around doing experiments, testing
our ideas, and discussing the concepts.
And we always looking for somebody who's
going to come at us with some piece of
evidence not consistent. And we look for
That's why we're offering a hundred
bucks. You show me a cancer cell that
can can set, I'll be more than happy to
give you the 100 bucks.
>> 100 bucks, people. Yeah, $100 I'll give
you a thou my some of my friends will
give you a thousand bucks. So, so, so,
but but the issue is here we haven't had
any takers and those who say that, you
know, we always find that there you got
plenty of fermentable fuels in your
environment. Get rid of that and see
what happens. Um, but but we're we're
testing all this and and and and the
other thing too is our research is
supported predominantly by private
foundations and philanthropy. So, we're
we we do what we think we need to do and
how to do it ourselves. Um, and and that
and you'd be surprised. This is a
revolution coming. This is a health
revolution that's on its way and it's
going to be restructured and it's going
to be open to the people and they're
going to know how to use this and the
law the better that we have the best
animal models of cancer all natural.
None of this artificial, these
genetically constructed monstrosities,
patient derived xenographs, all these
these crazy things that think that that
you can get grants on but have very
little relevance to the real world. So
we always do everything naturally. We
have natural metastatic cancer. We know
how metastatic cancer works. We know how
to stop metastatic cancer. We know how
to do all this because we have the
science behind us to do all this stuff.
and and as long as we get uh donations
from people who want to be part of the
movement, the transition, the paradigm
shift, whatever you want to call it,
they're excited about this. The future
is excited about this. So, so uh we're
moving in the right direction and and uh
private foundations and philanthropy are
giving us the support that we can do all
this and I keep publishing these papers
in open access journals so everybody can
read the read the papers. People ask me
all these questions. The answers are in
the papers. Please read the papers and
you'll get the answers.